runbooks/alerts/beszel-agent-update-failed.md, before:

# BeszelAgentUpdateFailed

## Alert Details

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| **Alert Name** | BeszelAgentUpdateFailed |
| **Severity** | Warning |
| **Source** | error-hunter sweep / Gatus (agent connectivity) |
| **Clusters Affected** | Global (Beszel hub on monit cluster, agents on bare-metal/VMs) |

## Description

This alert fires when a Beszel agent fails to auto-update to match the hub version, typically due to SSH authentication failures. The Beszel hub (running in the monit cluster) manages agents via SSH and attempts auto-updates when version mismatches are detected.

Beszel hub: monit cluster (monitoring namespace), port 8090.
Agents: Run on bare-metal/VMs (TrueNAS-HDD, UniFi-OS, Plex VM, etc.) on port 45876.

## Quick Diagnosis

### 1. Check Beszel hub UI

Navigate to `https://beszel.kernow.io` and check the Systems page for version mismatches or offline agents.

### 2. Verify agent connectivity

```
# Via Gatus (preferred)
mcp__observability__gatus_get_endpoint_status()
# Look for "Beszel Agent (TrueNAS-HDD)" status

# Direct TCP check
nc -z 10.10.0.103 45876
```

### 3. Check agent version

```bash
# SSH to the host and check agent version
ssh root@10.10.0.103 "beszel-agent --version"
```

## Common Causes

### 1. SSH Authentication Failure

**Symptoms:**
- error-hunter reports "SSH auth failed for root@<host>"
- Hub shows version mismatch in UI
- Agent is running and healthy but can't be updated

**Verification:**
```bash
# Test SSH from the Beszel hub pod (monit cluster)
# Or test from a host with the SSH key
ssh root@10.10.0.103 "echo ok"
```

**Resolution:**
1. Check if the SSH key is still valid:
   - Beszel stores SSH keys in its PocketBase data (`/beszel_data/`)
   - The hub needs passwordless SSH access to agents for auto-update
2. Re-authorize the agent:
   - In Beszel UI, go to Settings > Systems
   - Remove and re-add the affected agent
   - Copy the new SSH key to the target host
3. Manual agent update as fallback:
   ```bash
   ssh root@10.10.0.103 "beszel-agent update"
   ```

### 2. Agent Process Not Running

**Symptoms:**
- Gatus TCP check fails (agent port 45876 unreachable)
- Beszel hub shows agent as offline

**Verification:**
```bash
ssh root@10.10.0.103 "ps aux | grep beszel"
# Or check systemd service
ssh root@10.10.0.103 "systemctl status beszel-agent"
```

**Resolution:**
```bash
ssh root@10.10.0.103 "systemctl restart beszel-agent"
```

### 3. Network Connectivity Issue

**Symptoms:**
- Agent TCP port unreachable from monit cluster
- Multiple agents affected simultaneously

**Verification:**
```
# Check from monit cluster
mcp__observability__gatus_get_failing_endpoints()
```

**Resolution:**
- Check firewall rules on OPNsense (10.10.0.1)
- Verify network path: monit (10.10.0.30) → agent host
- Check if the agent host is on a different VLAN with blocked ports

### 4. TrueNAS-HDD Specific: Agent Binary Location

**Symptoms:**
- Agent installed but update command not found
- TrueNAS has non-standard paths

**Verification:**
```bash
ssh root@10.10.0.103 "which beszel-agent"
ssh root@10.10.0.103 "ls /usr/local/bin/beszel-agent"
```

**Resolution:**
```bash
# Reinstall agent on TrueNAS-HDD
ssh root@10.10.0.103 "curl -sL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/henrygd/beszel/main/supplemental/scripts/install-agent.sh -o /tmp/install-agent.sh && bash /tmp/install-agent.sh"
```

## Resolution Steps

### Step 1: Identify the affected agent

Check error-hunter findings or Beszel UI for version mismatch details.

### Step 2: Attempt manual update

Use the host-specific binary path (SSH-based auto-update commonly fails due to key auth):

```bash
# Synapse / Omada / TrueNAS-HDD
ssh root@<agent-host> "/usr/local/bin/beszel-agent update"

# TrueNAS-Media (TrueNAS SCALE has read-only /opt, agent lives in /root)
ssh root@10.10.0.100 "/root/beszel-agent/beszel-agent update"

# Plex-VM (installed to /opt)
ssh root@10.10.0.50 "/opt/beszel-agent/beszel-agent update"
```

### Step 3: If SSH auth fails, fix the keys

```bash
# Get the hub's public key from Beszel UI (Settings > Systems > agent entry)
# Add it to the agent host's authorized_keys
ssh root@<agent-host> "echo '<public-key>' >> ~/.ssh/authorized_keys"
```

### Step 4: Verify the update

Check Beszel UI to confirm the agent version now matches the hub version.

### Step 5: Verify Gatus monitoring

```
mcp__observability__gatus_get_endpoint_status()
# Confirm "Beszel Agent (TrueNAS-HDD)" shows healthy
```

## Known Agent Hosts

| Host | IP | Agent Port | Binary Path | Notes |
|------|-----|-----------|-------------|-------|
| TrueNAS-HDD | 10.10.0.103 | 45876 | `/usr/local/bin/beszel-agent` | NAS, NFS server |
| TrueNAS-Media | 10.10.0.100 | 45876 | `/root/beszel-agent/beszel-agent` | Media NAS (TrueNAS, read-only /opt) |
| Plex-VM | 10.10.0.50 | 45876 | `/opt/beszel-agent/beszel-agent` | Media server |
| Omada LXC | 10.10.0.3 | 45876 | `/usr/local/bin/beszel-agent` | Network controller |
| Synapse LXC | 10.10.0.22 | 45876 | `/usr/local/bin/beszel-agent` | Claude Code host |

## Prevention

1. **Ensure SSH keys are persistent** — Beszel data PVC stores keys; don't delete the PVC
2. **Monitor agent connectivity** — Gatus TCP checks on agent ports
3. **Keep agents updated** — When upgrading Beszel hub, also update agents promptly
4. **Document agent hosts** — Maintain the known agents table above

## Related Alerts

- Gatus `Beszel Agent (TrueNAS-HDD)` — TCP connectivity check
- Gatus `Beszel` — Hub web UI health check

## Detection Methods

| Method | Status |
|--------|--------|
| Gatus TCP check (agent port 45876) | Active — checks every 120s |
| error-hunter sweep (Beszel API) | Active — periodic sweeps |
| Beszel hub UI | Manual — shows version mismatch |

Commit message:

runbook: document beszel SSH key deployment gap and workaround (finding #908)

runbooks/alerts/beszel-agent-update-failed.md, after:

# BeszelAgentUpdateFailed

## Alert Details

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| **Alert Name** | BeszelAgentUpdateFailed |
| **Severity** | Warning |
| **Source** | error-hunter sweep / Gatus (agent connectivity) |
| **Clusters Affected** | Global (Beszel hub on monit cluster, agents on bare-metal/VMs) |

## Description

This alert fires when a Beszel agent fails to auto-update to match the hub version, typically due to SSH authentication failures. The Beszel hub (running in the monit cluster) manages agents via SSH and attempts auto-updates when version mismatches are detected.

Beszel hub: monit cluster (monitoring namespace), port 8090.
Agents: Run on bare-metal/VMs (TrueNAS-HDD, UniFi-OS, Plex VM, etc.) on port 45876.

## Quick Diagnosis

### 1. Check Beszel hub UI

Navigate to `https://beszel.kernow.io` and check the Systems page for version mismatches or offline agents.

### 2. Verify agent connectivity

```
# Via Gatus (preferred)
mcp__observability__gatus_get_endpoint_status()
# Look for "Beszel Agent (TrueNAS-HDD)" status

# Direct TCP check
nc -z 10.10.0.103 45876
```

### 3. Check agent version

```bash
# SSH to the host and check agent version
ssh root@10.10.0.103 "beszel-agent --version"
```

## Common Causes

### 1. SSH Authentication Failure

**Symptoms:**
- error-hunter reports "SSH auth failed for root@<host>"
- Hub shows version mismatch in UI
- Agent is running and healthy but can't be updated

**Verification:**
```bash
# Test SSH from the Beszel hub pod (monit cluster)
# Or test from a host with the SSH key
ssh root@10.10.0.103 "echo ok"
```

**Resolution:**
1. Check if the SSH key is still valid:
   - Beszel stores SSH keys in its PocketBase data (`/beszel_data/`)
   - The hub needs passwordless SSH access to agents for auto-update
2. Re-authorize the agent:
   - In Beszel UI, go to Settings > Systems
   - Remove and re-add the affected agent
   - Copy the new SSH key to the target host
3. Manual agent update as fallback:
   ```bash
   ssh root@10.10.0.103 "beszel-agent update"
   ```

### 2. Agent Process Not Running

**Symptoms:**
- Gatus TCP check fails (agent port 45876 unreachable)
- Beszel hub shows agent as offline

**Verification:**
```bash
ssh root@10.10.0.103 "ps aux | grep beszel"
# Or check systemd service
ssh root@10.10.0.103 "systemctl status beszel-agent"
```

**Resolution:**
```bash
ssh root@10.10.0.103 "systemctl restart beszel-agent"
```

### 3. Network Connectivity Issue

**Symptoms:**
- Agent TCP port unreachable from monit cluster
- Multiple agents affected simultaneously

**Verification:**
```
# Check from monit cluster
mcp__observability__gatus_get_failing_endpoints()
```

**Resolution:**
- Check firewall rules on OPNsense (10.10.0.1)
- Verify network path: monit (10.10.0.30) → agent host
- Check if the agent host is on a different VLAN with blocked ports

### 4. TrueNAS-HDD Specific: Agent Binary Location

**Symptoms:**
- Agent installed but update command not found
- TrueNAS has non-standard paths

**Verification:**
```bash
ssh root@10.10.0.103 "which beszel-agent"
ssh root@10.10.0.103 "ls /usr/local/bin/beszel-agent"
```

**Resolution:**
```bash
# Reinstall agent on TrueNAS-HDD
ssh root@10.10.0.103 "curl -sL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/henrygd/beszel/main/supplemental/scripts/install-agent.sh -o /tmp/install-agent.sh && bash /tmp/install-agent.sh"
```

## Resolution Steps

### Step 1: Identify the affected agent

Check error-hunter findings or Beszel UI for version mismatch details.

### Step 2: Attempt manual update

Use the host-specific binary path (SSH-based auto-update commonly fails due to key auth):

```bash
# Synapse / Omada / TrueNAS-HDD
ssh root@<agent-host> "/usr/local/bin/beszel-agent update"

# TrueNAS-Media (TrueNAS SCALE has read-only /opt, agent lives in /root)
ssh root@10.10.0.100 "/root/beszel-agent/beszel-agent update"

# Plex-VM (installed to /opt)
ssh root@10.10.0.50 "/opt/beszel-agent/beszel-agent update"
```

### Step 3: If SSH auth fails, fix the keys

```bash
# Get the hub's public key from Beszel UI (Settings > Systems > agent entry)
# Add it to the agent host's authorized_keys
ssh root@<agent-host> "echo '<public-key>' >> ~/.ssh/authorized_keys"
```

### Step 4: Verify the update

Check Beszel UI to confirm the agent version now matches the hub version.

### Step 5: Verify Gatus monitoring

```
mcp__observability__gatus_get_endpoint_status()
# Confirm "Beszel Agent (TrueNAS-HDD)" shows healthy
```

## Known Agent Hosts

| Host | IP | Agent Port | Binary Path | Notes |
|------|-----|-----------|-------------|-------|
| TrueNAS-HDD | 10.10.0.103 | 45876 | `/usr/local/bin/beszel-agent` | NAS, NFS server |
| TrueNAS-Media | 10.10.0.100 | 45876 | `/root/beszel-agent/beszel-agent` | Media NAS (TrueNAS, read-only /opt) |
| Plex-VM | 10.10.0.50 | 45876 | `/opt/beszel-agent/beszel-agent` | Media server |
| Omada LXC | 10.10.0.3 | 45876 | `/usr/local/bin/beszel-agent` | Network controller |
| Synapse LXC | 10.10.0.22 | 45876 | `/usr/local/bin/beszel-agent` | Claude Code host |

## Prevention

1. **Ensure SSH keys are persistent** — Beszel data PVC stores keys; don't delete the PVC
2. **Monitor agent connectivity** — Gatus TCP checks on agent ports
3. **Keep agents updated** — When upgrading Beszel hub, also update agents promptly
4. **Document agent hosts** — Maintain the known agents table above

### Systemic Issue: SSH Key Deployment (Design Gap)

**Problem**: Beszel stores SSH keys in its PocketBase database (dynamic, runtime), not in git. When the hub is redeployed or the PVC is recreated, SSH keys are lost or don't match what's on agents' `authorized_keys` files.

**Why this matters**: Auto-update via SSH fails silently. Manual updates are required until SSH keys are re-synchronized. This creates recurring findings (e.g., #908 on 2026-02-24 and again on 2026-02-24).

**Workaround (current)**: After Beszel hub deployment or PVC recreation:
1. Log into Beszel UI at https://beszel.kernow.io
2. For each agent in Settings > Systems, copy the public key
3. SSH to each agent and add the key to `~/.ssh/authorized_keys`
4. Run `beszel-agent update` to verify SSH works

**Long-term fix** (not yet implemented):
- Create an Ansible playbook that fetches the hub's public key and deploys it to all agents
- Or: Store the SSH key pair in Infisical and use it for both hub and agents (deterministic)
- Or: Use an agent webhook instead of SSH for updates

**Related events**:
- 2026-02-24: Findings #473, #474, #475, #476 — SSH auth failures, manual update required
- 2026-02-24: Finding #908 (stale) — version drift due to auto-update SSH failure

## Related Alerts

- Gatus `Beszel Agent (TrueNAS-HDD)` — TCP connectivity check
- Gatus `Beszel` — Hub web UI health check

## Detection Methods

| Method | Status |
|--------|--------|
| Gatus TCP check (agent port 45876) | Active — checks every 120s |
| error-hunter sweep (Beszel API) | Active — periodic sweeps |
| Beszel hub UI | Manual — shows version mismatch |
